---
title: What does NVRAM lock/unlock actually mean
---

So, recently I've realized that meaning of "lock/unlock" in context of
nvram on iOS is not understood correctly by many, so I've decieded to
make a quick blog post on meaning of those words.

Let's start with some context: [NVRAM stands for Non-volatile
random-access memory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-volatile_random-access_memory)

On iOS, nvram is mostly used to preserve some temp data between reboots.
For example, it's used to pass info to the bootloader, or to share some
data with the restore boot chain.

One thing passed through nvram to restore bootchain is particularly
interesting -- commonly referred to as "nonce" or even "apnonce".

Actually, the value passed is the "generator". When iBoot finds it in
the nvram, it generates nonce from it [(the NDF -- nonce derivation
function is SHA1 on older devices and SHA2-384 on
newer ones)](https://github.com/tihmstar/img4tool/blob/f6ff5aa0b63f8346917c8330b502d6b4729cb663/img4tool/img4tool.c#L550-L558)

Now a bit of history. Disclaimer: I might be wrong here and there. If
you're interested in more detailed info, see tihmstar's
[Blog](http://blog.tihmstar.net) and [33c3
talk](https://youtu.be/KXf5LxIN44c) ([slides](https://lab.dsst.io/slides/33c3/slides/7888.pdf)).

Introduction of these nonces was Apple's responce to replay attack on
the restore process. Originally, you could've just saved "shsh blobs"
(fancy name for device "personalized" firmware signature). Those didn't
have any protection of being reused.

So, Apple did quite obvious thing -- they've added a nonce into the
process. Everything should be good now: the iBoot generates a nonce with
a cryptographically secure (P)RNG, that tells it to iTunes, iTunes
requests blobs with that nonce, everything is good.

But there's a small problem: OTA updates. You can't ask Apple servers
for a signature over the internet from within the iBoot, and you can't
require iTunes for OTA. So, Apple has added a generator -- a value which
can be passed by iOS to restore chain:

- Userspace sends a request to kernel
- Kernel generates a random number
- Kernel generates a nonce from it
- Userspace requests blobs from TSS server with that nonce
- blobs and generator get passed to the restore chain
- iBoot generates nonce from generator, and restore chain verifies it

Blobs later get saved as apticket and are verified on boot.
However, the NDF is practically irreversible, and the generator is not
preserved anywhere: so, you can't just grab apticket from existing iOS
install and use that for restore, unless you know the generator used to
get the nonce it it.

Oh, and there's one another small problem. Remember how I've said
"cryptographically secure"? That was not the case for quite some time --
PRNG in restore chain was bad and nonce collisions as downgrade
technique was burned by [tihmstar](https://twitter.com/tihmstar).

And on 64bit devices SEP messes with downgrades too.

Ok, so we want to pass custom generator to the restore chain.
Normally, it's generated and set in nvram by kernel, on request from
userspace.

On \*OS/macOS nvram is split into different parts used for different
purposes, and kernel provides API for it via `IODTNVRAM` class -- see
`iokit/Kernel/IONVRAM.cpp` in xnu.

One of parts of that API is "variables" in key:value fashion, where key
is a string and value is bool, number, string or raw data:

```c
enum {
  kOFVariableTypeBoolean = 1,
  kOFVariableTypeNumber,
  kOFVariableTypeString,
  kOFVariableTypeData
};
```

The generator is passed via `com.apple.System.boot-nonce` variable as
string (hex) representation of the number.

That API is [exposed to
userspace](https://github.com/Siguza/PhoenixNonce/blob/master/PhoenixNonce/set.m#L39-L76) as a useragent, so, obviously,
access control is needed.

When a property is set, `IODTNVRAM::setProperty` gets called.

```c
// Verify permissions.
propPerm = getOFVariablePerm(aKey);
result = IOUserClient::clientHasPrivilege(current_task(), kIONVRAMPrivilege);
if (result != kIOReturnSuccess) {
  if (propPerm != kOFVariablePermUserWrite) return false;
}
if (propPerm == kOFVariablePermKernelOnly && current_task() != kernel_task) return 0;
```

So, getOFVariablePerm is used to check permissions, and it returns one
of following values:

```c
enum {
  kOFVariablePermRootOnly = 0,  // kern: rw, root: rw, user: --
  kOFVariablePermUserRead,      // kern: rw, root: rw, user: r-
  kOFVariablePermUserWrite,     // kern: rw, root: rw, user: rw
  kOFVariablePermKernelOnly     // kern: rw, root: --, user: --
};
```

`getOFVariablePerm` is quite short:

```cpp
UInt32 IODTNVRAM::getOFVariablePerm(const OSSymbol *propSymbol) const
{
  const OFVariable *ofVar;

  ofVar = gOFVariables;
  while (1) {
    if ((ofVar->variableName == 0) ||
	propSymbol->isEqualTo(ofVar->variableName)) break;
    ofVar++;
  }

  return ofVar->variablePerm;
}
```

The `gOFVariables` is used for permission checking:

```c
struct OFVariable {
  const char *variableName;
  UInt32     variableType;
  UInt32     variablePerm;
  SInt32     variableOffset;
};
typedef struct OFVariable OFVariable;

static const // Notice: on iOS 10 and below const keyword was missing
OFVariable gOFVariables[] = {
  {"little-endian?", kOFVariableTypeBoolean, kOFVariablePermUserRead, 0},
  {"real-mode?", kOFVariableTypeBoolean, kOFVariablePermUserRead, 1},
  // more variables
#if CONFIG_EMBEDDED
  {"backlight-level", kOFVariableTypeData, kOFVariablePermUserWrite, -1},
  {"com.apple.System.sep.art", kOFVariableTypeData, kOFVariablePermKernelOnly, -1},
  {"com.apple.System.boot-nonce", kOFVariableTypeString, kOFVariablePermKernelOnly, -1},
  // more variables
#endif
  {0, kOFVariableTypeData, kOFVariablePermUserRead, -1}
};
```

We can make three interesting observations:
- by default variables are `kOFVariablePermUserRead`
- there are plenty of variables with user write permissions used by system daemons (i.e. `backlight-level`)
- the variable we are interested in is kernel only

Now, assuming we have kernel rw primitives, how would we unrestrict the
variable?

Most obvious technique is to patch the gOFVariables, and change
permissions on the variable to root only. It's very clean -- only
affects one variable, changes it to root only from kernel only, and
doesn't have any other side effects.

That technique was used up to iOS 9 -- [here's a code
sample](https://github.com/Siguza/PhoenixNonce/blob/master/PhoenixNonce/nvpatch.m)

But, as I've already mentioned, on iOS 11 Apple has added a `const`
qualifier to the `gOFVariables`. For those unfamiliar with apple's
kernel building process, it means that the array would end up in
completely different area in kernel binary, and that area would be under
KPP/KTRR -- being practically untouchable.

Side note: While writing this, I wanted to add a reference to [this tweet](https://twitter.com/s1guza/status/908790514178301952). And only now have I saw [this thread](https://twitter.com/s1guza/status/942696529231532032) with 2 more workarounds.

New technique was needed.
At 19.12.2018 [ARX8x](https://twitter.com/ARX8x) has reached out to me
asking some questions, including question about nvram patches on iOS 11.

My initial thought was replicating setProperty with arbitrary kernel
call primitive, but that didn't work quite well. The next day looking
through xnu sources, I've noticed something really unexpected:

```cpp
class IODTNVRAM : public IOService {
  // ...
  virtual UInt32 getOFVariablePerm(const OSSymbol *propSymbol) const;
  // ...
};
```

The `getOFVariablePerm` method is `virtual`! Thanks, Apple!

So, the solution was quite simple: create a fake vtable with
`getOFVariablePerm` replaced.

The target was easy to find too: root only is defined to be 0, so
replacing it with ret0 gadget would be enough. Happily, there are
plenty of those in the same vtab: there are many no longer used
functions in there which just return 0.

[Sample code was published the next day](https://gist.github.com/stek29/1aabf7b576332941ae5c6f81407145a3), and less than in a day [julioverne](https://twitter.com/iJulioVerne) had made [a nonce-setter app](https://github.com/julioverne/NonceSet112) with it and [async\_wake](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/project-zero/issues/detail?id=1417).

(Side note: please, use sizeof when applicable -- see revisions on that gist)

But this approach has a caveat. Remember second observation, one about
existence of user writable variables? This patch (aka "unlock") makes
ALL variables root only -- and stuff does break because of it.

Because of that restoring original IODTNVRAM vtable is necessary after
setting the nonce -- "lock" nvram back.

I've also made a command line tool/daemon for that, which is worth
looking into as a reference --
[noncereboot11](http://github.com/stek29/noncereboot11).

And finally, questions are welcome -- feel free to reach out to me (for
example, on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/stek29)).

UPD 2018.06.26: Fixed some typos (thx Sparkley) and some errors (thx tihm)
